With the massification of the Internet and the advent of digital
technologies, the ability to process large volumes of data has become a
key aspect of how organisations (private and government) conduct their
businesses. By becoming data-driven, private companies, government and
not-for-profit institutions aim to gain insight and create value for
their stakeholders. However, this task is not always easy: according to
Accenture, many organisations find it difficult to derive value from
data, which can be expressed as a gap between the actual and potential
value of their data assets (Accenture 2019). In the same line, McKinsey
reports that lack of data quality and availability results in
organisations spending a considerable amount of time working in
non-value added data tasks (McKinsey 2019). The conclusion in both cases
is that the absence of an effective data strategy/data framework
prevents maximising the value from data, even if there is organisational
awareness of the potential.

# What is data governance?

A key element of a data strategy is **data governance**. Like many
similar industry and process terms, there are many variations when
defining the term. Some of the definitions found in the references are:

-   “\[…\] culture, functions, processes, and authorities to shape the
    execution, control and management of the enterprise data.”
    (Accenture 2019)
-   “Data governance is everything you do to ensure data is secure,
    private, accurate, available, and usable.\[…\]” (Google 2022)
-   “Data governance is the process of managing the availability,
    usability, integrity and security of the data in enterprise systems,
    based on internal data standards and policies that also control data
    usage.”(TechTarget 2022).
-   “Data governance is a required business capability if you want to
    get value from your data” (Ladley 2019, ch.3, page 17).

All sources agree that despite high awareness of the value of data
across organisations, data governance is usually not given the
importance it deserves. Lack of data literacy prevents a clear
understanding of the strategic importance of this function, being
relegated as an “IT capability”. However, data governance is a strategic
capability that requires broad appeal and sponsorship across
organisations in order to succeed. (Ladley 2019) also states that the
demand for a tangible return on investment (ROI) prevents from
understanding the value it brings. Good data governance adds value in
the same sense that adequate accounting or supply chain standards add
value to an organisation - bad/poor data governance will result in
missed opportunities at best, and costly mistakes at worst (TechTarget
2019), (Wikipedia 2022).

Another common key point is that effective data governance (like any
governance) entails a cultural change. While tools and processes may
facilitate quality assurance, privacy, compliance and other aspects, key
success factors are strong sponsorship from the leadership and genuine
adoption across the organisation. Taking this into account, creating a
data governance capability requires a strong practice of change
management across the organisation.

As expected, all sources consulted provide slightly different
definitions of the building blocks of data governance. Nevertheless, the
common ground on data governance scope includes:

-   Defining data standards, including data dictionaries and metadata.
-   Ensuring that data is accessible.
-   Ensuring data privacy and security.
-   Ensuring data is trustworthy through quality assurance.
-   Ensuring data consistency across the organisation (master data
    management).
-   Provide data stewardship across the entire organisation.
-   Champion data literacy.

# Adoption Challenges

Although the topic has become popular alongside the emergence of
advanced analytics and ML/AI, data governance is a capability that is
necessary even when data is used in “simpler ways”. Examples of this are
Nike shares being downgraded due to poor inventory management (CNBC
2017) or NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter crashing on landing due to a units
mix-up during the design phase (i.e. poor data dictionary) (Wired 2010).

Any governance capability tends to be invisible when it operates
successfully, with issues becoming apparent when it doesn’t exist or it
is incomplete. This is consistent with all the consulted sources, which
emphasise the effects of lacking data governance. Furthermore (Ladley
2019) stresses the point that a successful data governance capability
implies a cultural change and an improvement in data literacy across an
organisation, with no additional ongoing resources/staffing if done
right.

Lacking appropriate data standards, difficulty accessing the right data
and having low trust in data accuracy can be major challenges.
Unfortunately, with the explosion of data and the systems that create,
store and consume data, large organisations struggle with creating
consistent data rules across them. This is aggravated by scenarios where
organisations are siloed and/or rely heavily on outsourcing, effectively
creating additional barriers that prevent data to flow consistently
between different parties.

As a result of this, getting any outcomes can be really challenging. As
indicated by all the sources consulted, lack of adequate data governance
expresses itself in multiple ways - in my experience, I have encountered
the following:

-   **Lack of data standards** is perhaps the most recurrent issue I
    have faced working with data. This includes the way the data is
    distributed (e.g. having to deal with a database dump file, an Excel
    spreadsheet and a Word table), the lack of data dictionaries
    (e.g. date formats, lack of a single set of geographical names), any
    lack of metadata (e.g. not knowing the source or if a data set is
    current).
-   **Poor data accessibility** due to a sprawling application
    ecosystem. For security and privacy reasons access to systems can be
    restricted, and there is no defined method to extract data from
    them. This results in valuable information being locked out, or
    extremely difficult to extract at volumes.
-   **Deficient data collection**. Although it can be sometimes
    difficult to forecast what needs to be recorded, it is not
    infrequent to see occasions where little thought has been given to
    what and how is recorded. This will result in extra work to process
    the data to obtain the insights or metrics that motivated the data
    collection in the first place.

(Ladley 2019) correctly points out this is an organisational culture and
processes challenges. Tools can facilitate the implementation of data
governance, but its success depends on the organisation changing its
cultural practices when working with data. This is consistent with my
experience leading a team that suffered from inconsistent reporting,
where it took almost a year to turn around the way they conducted their
data input activities. In this case, the problem was not the absence of
standards and guidelines on both data input and reporting but a lack of
enthusiasm to comply and change the way they worked. The turning point
was when the entire team understood and realised the value of adherence:
individuals providing data were able to dedicate less time to data entry
and providing clarifications to managers, people creating reports were
able to elevate the quality of their work and focus on high-value
analysis, managers were provided with more trustworthy, solid points to
bring forward to stakeholders. In general, the whole team was able to
better identify areas of improvement and highlight their strengths.

# Closing Thoughts

Data accessibility, reliability and quality can be a major challenge.
Although there is awareness of the value of data, organisations have
lacked an understanding of the difficulties and effort involved in
obtaining insights from a messy data landscape. Sometimes awareness that
organisations are gathering vast amounts of data helps reinforce a
perception that’s enough to obtain value. Sometimes organisations rely
on new tools and technologies to bring some order but without adequate
data literacy, these investments don’t meet the expectations.

As a data analyst, the most patent benefit of adequate data governance
comes from having data from which reliable, trustworthy outcomes can be
obtained. Any model or analysis will depend on having “good data” as the
source material. This extends beyond the purely practical: it is also an
ethical imperative (e.g. is the data allowing to achieve fair results?)
and has regulation compliance implications (e.g. is personal data
respected according to GDPR?). Obviously, this will also affect the
amount of time spent in data cleaning, and free time for the creative,
“high-value” parts of data analysis.

Finally, data analysts have the opportunity to play in ensuring
successful governance practices. Being amongst the most data literate
individual in any organisation, data analysts have a key advocacy role
to play, helping to set the standards, championing processes and
showcasing the ways that governance add value (through their work). This
should be seen as a key part of the job, since “good data” (in a broad
sense) will only facilitate and enhance a data analyst’s work and
outcomes.

# References

Accenture 2019, ‘Closing the Data-Value Gap’, retrieved March 15, 2022,
from
&lt;<https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/pdf-108/accenture-closing-data-value-gap-fixed.pdf>&gt;.

CNBC 2017, ‘Goldman downgrades Nike due to “excess inventory” at
retailers’, *CNBC*, retrieved March 16, 2022, from
&lt;<https://www.cnbc.com/2017/10/19/goldman-downgrades-nike-due-to-excess-inventory-at-retailers-shares-fall.html>&gt;.

Google 2022, ‘What is Data Governance?’, *Google Cloud*, retrieved March
7, 2022, from
&lt;<https://cloud.google.com/learn/what-is-data-governance>&gt;.

Ladley, J 2019, *Data governance: How to design, deploy and sustain an
effective data governance program* 2nd edn, Academic Press, retrieved
from &lt;<https://go.exlibris.link/lv3m1gf6>&gt;.

McKinsey 2019, ‘Designing data governance that delivers value’,.

TechTarget 2019, ‘What is Data Quality and Why is it Important?’,
*SearchDataManagement*, retrieved March 16, 2022, from
&lt;<https://www.techtarget.com/searchdatamanagement/definition/data-quality>&gt;.

TechTarget 2022, ‘What Is Data Governance and Why Does It Matter?’,
*SearchDataManagement*, retrieved March 20, 2022, from
&lt;<https://www.techtarget.com/searchdatamanagement/definition/data-governance>&gt;.

Wikipedia 2022, ‘GDPR fines and notices’, *Wikipedia*, retrieved March
20, 2022, from
&lt;<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=GDPR_fines_and_notices&oldid=1064935377>&gt;.

Wired 2010, ‘Nov. 10, 1999: Metric Math Mistake Muffed Mars Meteorology
Mission’, *Wired*, retrieved March 16, 2022, from
&lt;<https://www.wired.com/2010/11/1110mars-climate-observer-report/>&gt;.
